So as far as you were concerned, then the campus
ought to be located as close to Scripps as
possible. That's right.
And the alternative, as I say, was that they would
put the School of Science and Engineering here on
the 50 acres of land the city had given them and put
the university somewhere else, the big new
university campus.
But I had several reasons for thinking this. One
was that I thought it would be good for the Scripps
Institution. Another was that the beautiful site
was by far the most handsome site
in the whole area. And the third was that the
existence of the Scripps Institution would give
credibility to the whole enterprise. This was a
great place and a well-known, worldwide known
place, so it would be easier to recruit faculty.
Now, the great antagonist of this position was one
of the regents, a man named Ed Pauley. Ed who?
Pauley, P-A-U-L-E-Y. Okay.
And he just really didn't want to have a campus in
San Diego at all. He never actually said that
because other regents were pretty enthusiastic
about it. And it would have been
counterproductive, from his political point of
view, it would have been counterproductive to
mount a frontal attack on the new campus. So he
proposed that it be in Balboa Park.
Balboa Park is the crown jewel of San Diego, sort of
like Golden Gate Park in San Francisco. And the
people of San Diego wouldn't give it up for
anything, let alone for the university, because
they don't understand.
So that was just obviously a ploy on his part. The
second ploy was after it was more or less agreed by,
it was not agreed, but I was enthusiastic about it,
and quite a few other people were to have it there
where it is now.
The second ploy was that the airplane noise level
would be too high because of the Miramar Naval Air
Station.
My assistant director was a man named Charles
Wheelock. Charles DeLorma Wheelock, retired
admiral, Bureau of Ships type admiral, naval
constructor. Kind of a funny guy to have an
associate director of an oceanographic
institution, but he just got seasick looking at
the ocean. That's why he was a naval
architect and not a line officer. But he was a An
absolutely wonderful man. Modest, decent,
honest, persuasive, bright, good guy. And I was
just awfully lucky to con the Navy into letting me
have him. Letting him retire early, come out here
to script.
I'd worked on this for years, getting him. And he
was able to talk the people at Miramar into
changing their flight patterns. instead of
flying directly over Scripps, as they had done on
their takeoff, they turned and made a sharp right
turn and flew out over Torrey Pines Park, Torrey
Pines State, that canyon between Torrey Pines and
Del Mar,
which is pretty hard on a General Dynamics
laboratory, a General Atomics laboratory. It
flew right over them.
But We then, Jeff Crouchy particularly, measured
lots of noise levels all over the Bose campus, and
we showed that they were not really very bad.
And we looked up other campuses that were under a
flight pattern, like the University of
Minnesota, and the University of Arizona, and the
Riverside campus at the University of
California. They all seemed to be getting along.
But Paulie's a very serious fighter when he gets
involved with something. He took the Regents out
to his estate on Coconut Island in the middle of
Kaneohe Bay in Milwaukee. And about two miles from
his house there, his estate, is a marine air
station. And he got the commandant of that station
to fly a flight of fighter planes right over his
house at about 200 feet and turn off their
afterburners, just as they got over the house. And
this scared the Regis to death, as you can imagine.
It's like an explosion. It
was awful. Pereira was a very good guy, Del
Pereira. Charles Luckman was a former president
of the Lieber Brothers and essentially a social.
He also had a degree in architecture, I guess. But
he was basically a salesman. And by this time, they
had split up after this search had been going on for
years over a new campus. And Luckman, being a very
political type and knowing that Poly was the most
powerful region, found all sorts of reasons why we
shouldn't have the campus here. He said it might
cost $20 million more for noise protection.
Unfortunately, he was also the architect for the
Scripps Memorial Hospital, which had a site about
two miles closer to Miramar than we were and much
closer to the flight pad as we were. And he wrote a
letter to the administrator of the hospital
saying that airplane noise would be no problem at
this new site for the hospital. And the
administrator said, one of the advantages of
living in a place a long time is you get to know a lot
of people pretty well. The administrator gave me a
copy of this letter.
It wasn't confidential, but I gave it to Clark
Kerr. We had another meeting at Davis. This was
about 1960, 1959, I guess.
Ferreira and Luckman got up and told us about all
this terrible noise problem here by the site. And
Clark said, well, it's very interesting, but I
have a letter here from you. You wrote to the
administrator of the Scripps Hospital. There
wouldn't be any noise
about it. Oh, my. And the upshot was that the
regents voted. Well, there were two upshots. One
was that the regents voted 21 to 1 to locate the site
in La Jolla. The other upshot was that I never
became chancellor. was a period victory as far as I
was concerned.
I was the dean of the School of Science and
Engineering. It's a paper organization. I was
chief campus officer. I was responsible for
making the plan, the academic plan for the
university and recruiting people for it.
So we had several principles, several ideas. The
regions put all sorts of conditions on having this
site here. One of the conditions was they should
get 1,200 acres of land free and clear from
somebody.
Another condition was that there should be a
university town, a university
community built up and planned by the city in
cooperation with the regents, with the Office of
Architects and Engineers of the university.
I think, I don't remember what other conditions
there were, but those were the principles, the
university plan, the plan for the region, and the
land free and clear.
So we had a campaign, a political campaign in San
Diego, which the city of San Diego voted to give us
something like 800 acres of land, Pueblo land, the
same kind of land I told you about before, right
next to the Scripps, with 180 acres of the Scripps
Institution. I've forgotten the exact number.
Maybe it was only 600. It was quite a large chunk of
land.
And then we started to work on the Marine Corps.
Charles Wheelock, of course, contributed to the
omen service there. The Marine Corps really had to
move because they were such a nuisance. It was a
Marine Corps rifle range called Camp Matthews.
And eventually, we got from the Navy. The Navy
agreed to turn over Camp Matthews
to the University. We got 1,200 acres of land
clear.
And they also, the city cooperated handsomely in
the planning of the whole region because of
something called University City, and they now
have a university town planned just east of the
campus.
The second idea was that,
besides this first idea that it ought to be here,
the second idea was that it ought to be primarily a
research university, not necessarily
primarily, but a strong emphasis on research and
graduate instruction.
And that therefore, it had to have outstanding
research people.
And that the way we would do this would be to build up
one department at a time to critical mass.
We would not start out with a faculty, an
undergraduate faculty covering the waterfront.
We would have just one department necessary to
begin with, and another one, and another one. Each
one good enough. of first-rate researchers in it
to have a good doctoral program and a good chance of
getting support for research from the federal
government. They would support each other in
ideas and in inspiration.
That intellectual exchange is quite essential
for research. Clark Kerr backed that
wholeheartedly.
So we did just that, and I got three people who were
brilliant academic recruiters and organizers.
Jim Arnold in chemistry, Keith Brooker in
physics, and David Bonner in biology. They were
all thrilled with the idea of building a new
university, and with the idea that we'd do it this
way and not simply Start from the bottom and build
up. Start from the top and go down. Build a roof
first, as we used
to call it. And they all had a whole list of first
grade people that they knew, many of whom were
young and not very well known. They thought it
would be good to have here, and they all went to town
and persuaded them. Iowa, of course, did a great
deal of this. In a sense, everybody that would come
here, we had a kind of a routine. We would talk about
our ideas at the new university. And we'd draw
diagrams, and we'd talk about the idea they were
going to tell you about in a
minute. And I'd take people up and show them where
the campus was going to be. There was a pile on it
that they left over from the days when it was an Army
camp. There was a pillar that supported the roof,
and it was still standing there. And there was a
fallen chimney right next to it. I'd get people to
stand on top of this fallen chimney, and you could
see it for about two miles in every direction. It
was quite a sight. And we'd always have a party for
them, and get the most interesting people we could
find at this party. Everybody thought this was a
dull place, and it was a dull place. But there were
some interesting
people here. A lot of people got excited about it.
Of course, the more we got, the more we got. It was
snowballing. One of our prime recruiting grounds
was the University of Chicago. The reason for that
was that Bob Hutchings, Bob Resting, had let the
neighborhood deteriorate. It had become the
center of a black ghetto.
And these blacks were all played rough, played
very rough. dangerous for a white man or a white
woman to go out on the streets, even in the daytime,
alone at night. So that's one of the principal
reasons why Harold Urey came here, Harold and
Freda Urey.
And then we got Joe Mayer and his wife, Maria Mayer,
later, after she came here, won a Nobel Prize from
the University of Chicago.
Several other people. Bonner himself came from
Yale and Brooker from the University of
Pennsylvania.
And Brooker emphasized
mainly solid state physics. He got half a dozen top
people in solid state physics. That was
essentially a new field. There were Matias and
Harry Sewell and
Walter Cohn were three of them. Then you got Norman
Crowe, theoretical physicist. He himself is a
theoretical nuclear physicist.
And most of these people were between 30 and 40
years old. Any of them worked for the Bell Labs.
That was another prime recruit down there. I had a
principal, quote, principal, end quote. He would
not pay anybody a higher salary than the salary he
was getting where he was. on the theory that if you
could buy people, somebody else could buy them
away from you. Well, that's a high-sounding
theory, all right. The fact is that people who came
here from the Bell Labs just about doubled their
salary because they were able to consult here in
the summertime. Working for the Bell Labs, if they
got $23,000 a year, pretty good salary. That's all
they got. They couldn't consult at all. Here, if
they got it, we offered them $23,000. Now you're
$15,000, $20,000 in the summertime consulting.
So really, Keith never told me this. But I found
out. I eventually caught on. Keith was always in
favor of paying people as much as you could
possibly pay.
This was his principle. It wasn't a question of
stealing people or buying them. It was a question
that they deserved a high income. They were good
physicists. That's what good physicists should
have, is high income.
And we got some very good people in the earth
sciences, some very good people in biology, very
good people in both chemistry and physics. Proof
of the pudding is that now,
15 years later, something like 45 members of the
National Academy of Sciences are on this campus.
That's the only two or three universities in the
country that have a higher number. Harvard has.
The University of California at Berkeley has. And
that's about it. Or Rockefeller University. Jet
Bronk and I used to compare notes all the time. He
wanted to do what I, he was doing what I really would
have liked to do, but couldn't do.
Building up primarily a small graduate
school. They've got Nobel Prize winners running
out over here at Rockefeller University. Every
other guy you see is a Nobel Prize winner. And
they're all members of the National Academy of
Science. But you know, we did pretty well
under the circumstances. And the most important
thing that I did, without really realizing it, was
to find a first rate library. I was pushed hard on
that by people who come from regular
universities. So I would back places like the
Scripps Institution. They thought a library was
very important. And it is very important. It's
terribly important. We got a man from Kent, a
librarian at the University of Kent, named Mel
Boyd,
who's built up really an impossible job of
building up a pretty good library here in 15 years
with very inadequate resources. Got well over a
million volumes.
about a million and a half.
It's divided into five different libraries, the
Central Library, the Science and Engineering
Library, the Scripps Institution Library, the
Undergraduate Library, and the Medical,
Biomedical Library. Each of these is a model of
organization and management and service, plus
having the books and the journals.
The way I got started on this was that when it was
planned to have these three new campuses, he
volunteered to collect an undergraduate library
for all three of them in duplicate.
Since he was on the ground and the other two
campuses had really gotten started yet. We were
started because we had scripts.
He did just that. He got 75,000 volumes in
triplicate. He gave one to Santa Cruz, one to
Irvine, and we have one here. The Regents were so
impressed by this that for a few years they gave him
almost everything he wanted by the university
administration.
The second chancellor here was a man named John
Galbraith. And he
was a historian and very much aware of the
necessity of a research library for humanists,
more so for humanists than either for natural
scientists or social scientists. So he pushed the
library very hard, too. Clark Kerr was his
longtime friend, and he got Clark quite
sympathetic with it, too. Unfortunately, Clark
got fired. Clark used to say, I entered my job and
left it the same way, fired with enthusiasm.
But the
thing which we used to attract people, the idea we
used to attract people, and it was a very good idea.
We really had three ideas. One of them was that we
would divide the place up into colleges, not
Oxbridge-type small colleges, primarily
undergraduate teaching institutions, but
essentially little universities side by side,
universities of about 2,000 students. And we plan
to have 12 of them, 2,000 25-minute students, 1
third of graduates and 2 thirds undergraduates.
It's a mix, I
thought. And the reason for this was that each
college could be semi-autonomous, could provide
a liberal education in all branches of human
thought. And at the same time, the faculty would be
small enough so they could think and act, and not
only react, which is the way it was at Berkeley,
because the faculty was so goddamn big.
Berkeley has traditionally been run by the
faculty, but they don't really run it. You never
get any ideas put across. It's impossible to
experiment with a faculty of 3,000 people or
something.
Well, my idea was to have maybe 150 to 200 people as
the faculty of each of these little universities.
And they would be able to sneak up their own
curriculum and their own requirements and their
own programs. And they would be different. You'd
be sure that they were different by the kind of
people you get for each one. The first college I
thought of as essentially a place to produce
graduate students. In other words, a scholarly
place. Not just in science, but in humanities and
social sciences as well as in natural sciences. I
thought of the second one as perhaps a place to
produce artists and people related to artists,
like architects,
journalists, writers.
The third college would be perhaps a graduate
school a school of business administration, a
fourth maybe a school of law, undergraduate,
pushed in that direction towards administration
or government. And you could have a somewhat
different set of departments in each one. Each set
of departments, however, would cover the
waterfront of human knowledge. And one you'd
have, say, traditional biology. This would be the
one that emphasized art. Because the great
motivation of the traditional biologist It's
beauty. It's the aesthetics of organisms. In our
first college, the graduate school college, we'd
have high-powered experimental biology. So it's
different when we have ecology, applied biology,
leading towards, say, government management.
You have different kinds of earth science.
There's different kinds of physics, solid state
physics in one, theoretical physics in another,
hydrodynamics in a third, and so forth. Well, this
didn't work out, but it sounded good. And
everybody, all professors traditionally
deplored apartments. They're enthusiastic
about multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary
studies on paper. In fact, they don't give a damn
about interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary
studies. And they love departments,
as you know. But they thought it would be nice to try
it the other way.
My second idea was that we should emphasize
creativity in the arts rather than criticism. In
other words, we have musicians and painters and
actors and playwrights and scene and stage
designers
and sculptors and composers and musicians,
performing musicians, not people who wrote about
what other people did in the arts.
In other words, our humanities would be the
complement of the sciences in the sense that they
would be creative rather than critical. One of the
reasons for that was we didn't have much of a
library. It couldn't be very critical.
Third idea was that we'd mix up the graduates and
the undergraduates.
The undergraduates would get in contact with
research just as soon as they possibly could.
Because I said, and Glenn Seaborg said, and many of
us agree, that the object of a college education is
to learn how to learn, not to learn something, but
to learn how to learn. Because times are changing
so fast, nothing that you learn makes much sense 10
years later.
So therefore, we would try to get the
undergraduates involved with research, and we
wanted to get the graduates involved with breadth
of learning that you get with contact with the
humanities and the social sciences if you're in
the natural sciences. Not necessarily in
courses, but in seminars and informal
activities. So we wanted to have each college have
a mix of graduates and undergraduates.
Well,
I guess none of these ideas have really worked out
exactly.
colleges have turned out to be places that are
primarily different in their undergraduate
curriculum.
And they do have some differences in the
undergraduate curriculum. And the students
think it's great to belong to a college. As far as I
can make out, they do. That's what the faculty
members tell me.
But as far as the graduates mixing with the
undergraduates are concerned, that just doesn't
happen
very much. The departments are university-wide
departments. They don't belong to the college.
They belong to the university. They serve all the
colleges, and they have a life of their
own. It is true that we have a lot of creative art
here. Not necessarily a good thing. Because the
creative artists are all wild artists, as you can
imagine. That's what art nowadays amounts to, is
something most people don't understand.
The one idea that did work out pretty well, and very
well, in fact, was the idea of building from the top
down and building department by department. And
we have a series of very good departments, not
necessarily very broad departments. For
example, our economists are all
econometricians. Now, God knows what
econometricians do in the modern world, but
that's what our guys do anyhow. And our
psychologists are all experimental
psychologists.
Nevertheless, they're good. We have a group of
young, enthusiastic political scientists and a
group of anthropologists.
I think we've failed in linguistics, more or less.
I'm not sure we're very good in comparative
literature. We're very good in basic sciences.
Pretty good in mathematics. I guess fair in
philosophy. I'm not sure
about that.
And so I guess that
the only thing that really is a sort of a permanent
relic or a permanent residue of these great ideas
is the college, is the university's
physical structure. The dormitories and the
academic buildings for each college are right
together. And we have three of, four of them now.
Revelle College, your college, what's called
third college, what's called fourth.